[Security] Exception types and value syntax (#5942)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/security/manage-elastic-defend/exception-types-and-syntax.md

**Examples:**

| What you want to match | Value to enter |
| --- | --- |
| `C:\Windows\explorer.exe` | `C:\Windows\explorer.exe` |
| `C:\Program Files\*\app.exe` (wildcard) | `C:\Program Files\*\app.exe` |
| `\\server\share\file.txt` (UNC path) | `\\server\share\file.txt` |

### Wildcard characters

The `?` and `*` wildcards work the same way across all exception types — `?` matches one character and `*` matches zero or more characters — but only the **detection rule** exception type requires escaping these characters when you want to match them literally.

## Troubleshoot exception values [troubleshooting-exception-values]

Because escaping rules differ between exception types, values that work in one context can silently fail in another. The following table describes symptoms and how to resolve them:

| Symptom | Likely cause | Resolution |
| --- | --- | --- |
| {{elastic-endpoint}} exception or trusted application does not match a Windows path | The value contains double backslashes (for example, `C:\\Windows\\explorer.exe`) copied from a detection rule exception | Remove the extra backslashes and enter the path as it appears on disk: `C:\Windows\explorer.exe` |

> | Detection rule exception with the `matches` operator does not match a Windows path | The value contains unescaped single backslashes (for example, `C:\Windows\explorer.exe`) | Escape each backslash: `C:\\Windows\\explorer.exe` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Detection rule exception with the `matches` operator does not match a Windows path | The value contains single backslashes that are not escaped (for example, `C:\Windows\explorer.exe`) | Escape each backslash: `C:\\Windows\\explorer.exe` |
```

| Exception was copied from a working detection rule into an {{elastic-endpoint}} exception and no longer matches | Detection rule escaping syntax is not valid for {{elastic-endpoint}} exceptions | Re-enter the value without escaping, matching the path exactly as it appears on the host |

## Exception type comparison [exception-type-comparison]

The following table compares how detection rule exceptions and {{elastic-endpoint}} exceptions differ in behavior and risk:

| | Detection rule exception | {{elastic-endpoint}} exception |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Where it operates** | Detection engine in {{kib}} | {{elastic-endpoint}} (on the host) |
| **Primary purpose** | Suppress alerts in {{kib}} | Exclude a process from blocking and monitoring on the endpoint |

> | **Affects endpoint blocking?** | No — {{elastic-endpoint}} may still block or detect the activity | Yes — prevents blocking and detection on the host |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Affects endpoint blocking?** | No — {{elastic-endpoint}} can still block or detect the activity | Yes — prevents blocking and detection on the host |
```
